Dear Friends and Colleagues of Mat,

We write to invite you to a one-and-a-half day event at UC San Diego, on June 24-25, 2022, in celebration of the life and career of Mat McCubbins. We are co-organizing the event in conjunction with UCSD's Political Science Department and Duke University's Law School and Political Science Department, with support from John Aldrich and Nate Monroe.

The event will have three components—a research conference, a celebration of Mat's intellectual contributions, and a celebration of Mat's life. The schedule is as follows: 


* Friday, June 24 *

1:00 pm - 5:00 pm

The first half of a conference in which 8-10 authors will present original research. We invite paper proposals from those who would like to present. We are looking for papers that carry forward Mat's intellectual legacy by building on research agendas set by Mat. Here is the call for paper proposals (please use the survey link below for submitting a proposal).

Democratic Delegation and Government Efficacy: The Diverse McCubbins Legacy

We ask for papers exploring institutional and behavioral factors that affect the efficacy of one or more types of delegation within democratic governments—such as delegation from voters to elected officials, from elected officials to political parties, from one elected branch to another, from elected branches to bureaucracies, or from national governments to international entities. We are particularly interested in papers that effectively apply best practices to draw causal inferences from theory-based hypotheses. We welcome papers addressing these topics from US, comparative, or IR perspectives.

 
5:00 pm – 7:00 pm

A dinner for conference attendees will follow on Friday evening.

 
* Saturday, June 24 *

8:00 am - 12:00 pm

The second half of the research conference.


12:00 pm – 1:30 pm

Lunch for conference participants and afternoon event attendees.
 

1:30 – 3:00 pm

A celebration of Mat's academic contributions, consisting of roundtable panels in which Mat's friends and students discuss Mat's significant and diverse contributions to the understanding of social science, law, and science.
 

3:00 – 5:00 pm

A celebration of Mat's life, open to the public, in which Mat's many friends, colleagues, and students are welcome to share their memories and reminiscences of Mat.
 

5:00 pm – 7:00 pm

A reception with drinks and appetizers, open all who wish to attend.



Due to limited funding, we can reimburse up to $1,000 in travel costs for each of the research conference paper presenters (or, instead, we will reimburse a designated co-author). If we have surplus finds, we will prioritize reimbursing grad students' and junior faculty members' full travel costs).

We hope to set up a room discount, at a hotel near campus, for all attendees. Once we have more info, we will forward it to those have indicated they would like to attend.

For planning purposes, we ask that you complete the following survey if you will attend any or all of the events. The survey will also ask if you would like to (1) speak during the celebration of Mat's life, or (2) present an original research paper during the conference part of the event (participation in more than one of these capacities is welcome). You can access the survey here.

Right now it looks like COVID is unlikely to interfere with our plans, but that obviously could change between now and June. As the event draws nearer, we will provide additional details about campus COVID protocols to those of you who indicate that you will attend (or that you hope to do so). We will also send additional details about the event.

We ask that you complete the survey by March 31, 2022, please. We will respond soon after to those who submit proposals for conference papers.

Finally, we're sure that the list of people getting this message does not include everyone who should get it. We apologize to those inadvertently left off, and encourage those who get the message to forward it to other friends and colleagues of Mat's who weren't sent this message.

If you have any questions, please contact Chris Den Hartog (cdenhart@calpoly.edu).

We hope to see you there!

Best,

Nate Monroe and Chris Den Hartog
