Ms. Ref. No.:  JELS-D-07-00004 Title: Partisanship in Non-Partisan
Electoral Agencies and Democratic Compliance: Evidence from Mexico's
Federal Electoral Institute Electoral Studies

Dear Guillermo Rosas,

I now have the reviews of your paper "Partisanship in Non-Partisan
Electoral Agencies and Democratic Compliance: Evidence from Mexico's
Federal Electoral Institute". The reviewers offer several
suggestions for revisions that I would like for you to address.
Accordingly, I wish to offer you a "revise and resubmit" with no
guarantee of ultimate publication.  The revised version of the
revised paper will be reviewed by both original reviewers. The
revised paper should accompany a detailed memo indicating how you
have specifically reacted to the reviewers' comments and
suggestions.  Please pay particular attention to the comments made
by reviewer three.

To submit a revision, please go to http://ees.elsevier.com/jels/ and
login as an Author. Your username is: grosasb Your password is:
rosas66875 On your Main Menu page is a folder entitled "Submissions
Needing Revision". You will find your submission record there.

Thank you for your interest in Electoral Studies.

Sincerely,

Harold D. Clarke Editor Electoral Studies

Reviewers' comments:

Reviewer #2: This is a very nice paper that deserves publication in
Electoral Studies.  The paper argues that the Mexican electoral
oversight commission (IFE) is closer to a ``pluralist'' model where
off setting interests result in checks and balances than an
insulated ``technocratic'' model where members are non-partisan
experts.  The authors provide considerable theoretical justification
for why the partisan ``watchdog'' model is more appropriate in the
case of IFE (given the founding and stucture of the institution).
The manuscript involves a sophisticated methodological approach to
estimating the ideal points of IFE commissioners and provides
empirical evidence to show that IFE members, why generally
consensual, exhibit behavior consistent with their party sponsors.

The only minor concern that I have is with the conclusion that this
``lends credence to the claim that election arbiters that embrace
partisan strife, rather than those that expunge party politics...are
better able to organize free and fair elections...''.  There really
isn't any evidence of this.  This has been relatively successful in
Mexico, but there is no way to evaluate how it may have been if it
were non-partisan without some sort of cross-system comparison.
Beyond this, there is very little I would change in the paper.  The
authors may consider reducing the number and length of footnotes,
and incorporating some of the literature from the US courts research
that suggest similar types of themes (distinguishing between
motivations from norms of impartiality and ideology).  The courts
literature came to mind at the discussion of TRIFE since there is
substantial work on the Supreme Court's anticipation of
congressional legislation in response to a SC decision, motivating
the court to cast decisions in terms of constitutionality versus
statute.



Reviewer #3: This paper analyzes votes in Mexico's Federal Electoral
Institute using Bayesian MCMC methods that Jackman, Hibbs, Clinton,
and others developed to study legislative coalitions.  The theory
regarding partisan delegation of authority to ostensibly
non-partisan institutions is well articulated and, I believe, would
be of interest to a number of ES readers.  The authors also present
a considerable amount of empirical analysis and have included a
helpful methodological appendix.  This is a potentially publishable
manuscript, though I have several significant revisions to
recommend:

-   One of the central claims of this piece is that "political
parties, not non-partisan technocrats, have always been the ones
that run the show at IFE" (p. 4; this point is repeated in several
other places).  This is an overstatement.  According to the authors'
count (pp. 18-19), the majority of IFE votes were unanimous.  These
votes were excluded when estimating ideal points. And when
connections between these ideal points and the three major Mexican
parties are explored via ANOVA analyses (Table 7), only one out of
three initial models is statistically significant (Woldenberg II).
A more accurate conclusion would be that partisan disagreements
appeared to guide many of the councilors' decisions, even if IFE
operated largely as a consensual body.

-   What are the larger cross-national implications of this
analysis?  The paper opens with references to several major works in
comparative politics - works that cover a wide range of cases.  In
the conclusion, however, the authors remain focused on Mexico.  Can
this piece shed any light on our understanding of political parties,
partisan delegations of authority, and the conduct of elections in
any other democratic contexts?

-   In several places, the paper stresses that electoral regulatory
bodies should "embrace partisan strife" (see, e.g., the closing line
of the abstract and the conclusion).  Yet as noted on pp. 10-11,
competition among the parties ultimately resulted in the PRD being
shut out of the EMB. The authors' main point, it seems, is that
party maneuverings can be constructive if they lead to active
checking and balancing within the EMB, but could be corrosive if
they end up excluding officials from one of the principal parties.
Unfortunately, the theoretical framework (Section 2) is not designed
to specify the conditions under which parties will collaborate to
exclude a rival party, as the PRI and PAN did in 2003.

-   Regarding the empirical analysis, abstentions are not handled in
a consistent manner. For the findings in Table 3, they are coded as
equivalent to dissenting votes (p. 15); in later models they are
treated as missing values, and presumably dropped.  According to
Table 6, the councilors varied widely in the number of votes under
consideration.  What can be assumed about missing votes?  Would they
be missing at random? If not, the estimation of ideal points could
be biased.
